કિર્તિ મંદિર એ મહાત્મા ગાંધી અને કસ્તુરબાની સ્મૃતિમાં, ભારતનાં ગુજરાત રાજ્યમાં પોરબંદર શહેરમાં, બંધાયેલું સ્મૃતિ મંદિર છે.
૨ ઓક્ટોબર ૧૮૬૯નાં રોજ મહાત્મા ગાંધી જ્યાં જનમ્યા તે ગાંધી કુટુંબનાં બાપદાદાઓનાં આ ઘરની લગોલગ ’કિર્તિ મંદિર’ આવેલું છે. વર્ષ ૧૯૪૪માં જ્યારે બ્રિટિશ સરકાર દ્વારા અંતિમ વખત, નજરકેદમાં રહેલા ગાંધીજીને, આગાખાન મહેલમાંથી, મુક્ત કરાયા ત્યારે પોરબંદરની સ્થાનિક જનતાએ ગાંધીજીનાં જન્મ સ્થાન પર એક આદર્શ સ્મૃતિસ્થળ રચવાનો નિર્ણય કર્યો.At that time, organization of the project was accomplished by the intensive efforts of the easrtwhile Maharaja of Porbandar, H.H. Maharana Shri Natavarsinhji, and Raj Ratna Shri Nanjibhai Kalidas Mehta and his wife, Smt. Santokbehn Mehta. Before the foundation of the Kirti Mandir was started, the adjacent ancestral house was purchased from those members of the Gandhian family who were living in it. Mahatmaji himself, on his own part had given his consent to Nanjibhai in writing, with legal documents for the sale of the whole building. He had signed with his own hand the registration papers, which are displayed at a museum room in Kirti Mandir Complex. The ancestral house, as such, now forms a part of Kriti Mandir complex.
The original three storied house is built like a Haveli, purchased by the great grand father of Mahatmaji, Shri Harjivan Raidas Gandhi, some two hundred years before, in the seventeenth century, from a local woman and the upper stories were added over the years. It was this house where Gandhiji's father Karamchand, uncle, Tulsidas and grandfather Uttamchand lived, who had all been Prime Ministers to the Jethwa Rajput rulers of the princely state of Porbandar.
The foundation stone of modern structure and attractive Kirti Mandir was laid in 1947 during the lifetime of Gandhiji by Shree Darbar Gopaldas Desai. The whole credit of constructing this national memorial of Mahatma Gandhiji goes to the famous industrialist, Nanjibahi Kalidas Mehta, who not only initiated the idea to build a memorial but also donated the whole money purchase the ancestral house and also to build new complex called Kirti Mandir.
The memorial was completed in 1950, by which time Gandhiji was no more. The memorial was named Kirti Mandir and then Home Minister, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel inaugurated and declared open this place for public on May 27, 1950. Afterwards this beautiful memorial was handed over to the Central Government of India.
The height of the temple is of 79 feet symbolizes the 79 years of lifespan of Gandhiji. The monument Kirti Mandir is symbol of religious integration of six religions, the architectural elements of Hindu, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi temple, Church and Mosque are symbolized at Kirti Mandir integrate, which symbolize Gandhiji’s respect towards all religion.
The whole the architecture of the Kirti Mandir was done by Shri Prushottambhai Mistry, a resident of Porbandar. He completed construction within two years of time limit by working for days and night himself.
There are life size oil paintings of Mahatma Gandhi and Kasturba kept side by side in the centre of Kirti Mandir. Gandhiji wanted that he should not be made a God and so, keeping his wishes, floral garlands are not used. The auspicious words, ‘The Truth’ and ‘Non-violence’, symbolizing his life and preachings are placed near their feet.
On the right side there are two rooms as the memorials of Shri Maganlal Gandhi and Shri Mahadev Desai, and the room on the left hand side is meant for the exhibition of the museum. These three rooms contain articles of khadibhandar, things of handi-craft, the centre is for the sale of books, the office-room and the reception hall. Kasturba-Mahila Library situated in the Kirtimandir is an international institution.
The Kirti Mandir is the main tourist attraction of the town. As well, many foreign dignitaries and Indian politicians visit Kirti Mandir, which houses the ancestral house and birth place of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. The place where Gandhiji was born is marked with a Swastika for identification.
ગાંધીજીનું ઘર, ડિસે.‘૧૨.
કસ્તુરબા અને ગાંધીજીનાં આદમકદનાં તૈલચિત્રો.
ગાંધીજીનો અભ્યાસ કક્ષ.
