હુદહુદ ચક્રવાત એ હાલમાં ભારતનાં પુર્વ સીમાડે મંડરાઇ રહેલો એક સક્રીય ચક્રાવાત છે. ૨૦૧૪નાં વર્ષ દરમ્યાન હાલસુધીમાં પુર્વોત્તર હિંદ મહાસાાગરમાં સર્જાયેલા ચક્રવાતોમાં સૌથી મોટો ચક્રવાત મનાઇ રહ્યો છે. ઓમાન દ્વારા અપાયેલ નામ હુદહુદ એ દુનીયાના ઘણાખરા દેશોમાં અને શીયાળા દરમ્યાન ગુજરાતમાં જોવા મળતા એક પક્ષીનું નામ પણ છે..
Under the influence of an upper air cyclonic circulation, a low pressure area formed over Andaman Sea on October 6. It slowly consolidated and was upgraded to a depression by the India Meteorological Department on October 7. While over open waters, the depression continued to encounter favorable environment, and a tropical cyclone formation alert was issued by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center, followed by IMD upgrading the storm into a deep depression.
In the early hours of October 8, the JTWC started issuing its advisories for the system as it recorded tropical storm winds at the storm's centre. The IMD later reported that the deep depression made its first landfall over Long Island, Andaman and had reached cyclonic storm intensity, naming it Hudhud. After entering the Bay of Bengal, Hudhud continued to intensify the following day, and was upgraded to a severe cyclonic storm.
Early on October 10, the JTWC classified the storm a Category 1 tropical cyclone after its winds were estimated at 120 km/h and it formed a microwave eye feature, located in an environment favorable for further intensification with moderate wind shear. The IMD upgraded Hudhud to a very severe cyclonic storm later the same day, and the JTWC further upgraded the storm to a Category 2 tropical cyclone.
On October 11, Hudhud underwent rapid intensification and developed an eye at its center, resulting the JTWC to classify the storm as a Category 3 equivalent tropical cyclone.
As of 2330 IST, 11 October 2014, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Hudhud was located near latitude 16.4°N and longitude 84.7°E, about 210 km southeast of Visakhapatnam and about 320 km south of Gopalpur. Maximum sustained three minute wind-speeds are estimated at 90 kn, gusting to 110 kn . Minimum central pressure is estimated at 960 mbar . Dvorak intensity of the storm is T 5.0. The system is expected to move northwestwards and cross the coast of northern Andhra Pradesh close to Visakhapatnam on 12 October 2014.
For more latest information on this system, click through the links below:
The National Disaster Response Force mobilized 35 teams in Andhra Pradesh and Odisha. Four districts of Odisha and three districts of Andhra Pradesh are largely to be impacted. An alert has been sounded in nine out of 13 districts of Andhra Pradesh where standing crop of paddy, followed by groundnut, sugarcane, pulses and other horticulture crops has yet to be harvested. According to the reports received by the state Disaster Management Commissioner A R Sukumar, 35,000 persons have been evacuated in Srikakulam district, 6,000 in Vizianagaram, 15,000 in Visakhapatnam, 50,000 in East Godavari and 5,000 in the West Godavari district. Total 1.11 Lakh People has been evacuated and shifted to safer places. The local government has made adequate arrangement to shift 5,14,725 people in all.
The Odisha government has put 16 districts under high alerts. The districts which have been alerted in Odisha are Balasore, Kendrapara, Bhadrak, Jagatsinghpur, Puri, Ganjam, Mayurbhanj, Jajpur, Cuttack, Khurdha, Nayagarh, Gajapati, Dhenkanal, Keonjhar, Malkangiri and Koraput districts.
East Coast Railway has cancelled the services of 38 trains on October 12 when cyclone is expected to hit Odisha and Andhra Pradesh.
ઢાંચો:2014 North Indian Ocean cyclone season buttons
