ઢાંચો:Infobox Space mission
એપોલો ૧૭ એ નાસાનાં એપોલો અભિયાનની અગીયારમી સમાનવ અવકાશ યાત્રા હતી. તે અમેરિકાનું પ્રથમ સમાનવ રાત્રી પ્રક્ષેપણ અને એપોલો અભિયાનનું છઠું અને છેલ્લું ચંદ્ર પર ઉતરાણ માટેનું ઉડયન હતું. આ મિશન ૭/૧૨/૧૯૭૨ નાં રોજ રાત્રે ૧૨:૩૩ EST સમયે શરૂ થયું અને ૧૯/૧૨/૧૯૭૨ નાં સમાપ્ત થયું. જેણે સમાનવ ચંદ્ર પર ઉતરાણ અને સમાનવ નિમ્ન ભૂ-ભ્રમણકક્ષાની બહાર ઉડયન એમ બન્ને કામો પુરા કર્યા.
કૌંસમાંનાં આંકડાઓ વ્યક્તિગત દરેકનાં આ મિશન અને આગલા અવકાશઉડાનનાં આંકડા દર્શાવે છે.
લુ.મો.ચા. તરીકે ખરેખરતો 'જો એન્જલ' પસંદ થયેલ, પરંતુ જ્યારે એ નક્કિ થઇ ગયું કે એપોલો ૧૭ છેલ્લું ચંદ્ર ઉડાન બનવાનું છે, તો વૈજ્ઞાનિક સમુદાયોએ નાસાને એક વૈજ્ઞાનિક અવકાશયાત્રીને ચંદ્ર પર ઉતરાણ માટે પસંદ કરવા દબાણ કર્યું. આને કારણે સ્મિટ,નિષ્ણાત ભૂ-વૈજ્ઞાનિકને તક મળી, અને તેને રદ કરાયેલ એપોલો ૧૮ ની ટુકડીમાંથી દુર કરી,એન્જલનાં સ્થાને એપોલો ૧૭ માં સમાવાયો.
આ મિશનનું મુળ સંરક્ષા ચાલકદળ એપોલો ૧૫નું મુખ્યચાલક દળ હતું:
The Apollo 15 prime crew received the backup assignment since this was to be the last lunar mission and the backup crew would not rotate to another mission. However, when the Apollo 15 postage stamp incident became public in early 1972 the crew was reprimanded by NASA and the Air Force . Director of Flight Crew Operations Deke Slayton removed them from flight status and replaced them with Young and Duke from the Apollo 16 prime crew and Roosa from the Apollo 14 prime and Apollo 16 backup crews.
20° 11' 26.88" N - 30.1° 46' 18.05" E
ઇ.વિ.એ. નો અર્થ "અતિરિક્ત વાહનીય ગતિવિધિ" એવો થાય છે, અર્થાત ચંદ્રભૂમિ પર વાહન લઇ અને પ્રયોગાર્થે જે પરિભ્રમણ કરેલ હોય તેની વિગતો અહીં આપવામાં આવેલ છે.
યાનનું ઉતરાણ બિંદુ ૧૭° ૫૨′ દક્ષિણ, ૧૬૬° ૭′ પશ્ચિમ, સોલોમન ટાપુઓની ૩૫૦ દરિયાઇ માઇલ દ.પૂ. અને બચાવ જહાજ 'યુ.એસ.એસ.ટિકોન્ડેરોગા' ) થી ૬.૫ કિ.મી. દુર હતું. એપોલો ૧૭ તેનાં લક્ષ્ય બિંદુથી લગભગ ૬૪૦ મીટર દુર ઉતર્યુ હતું.
One of the last two men to set foot on the Moon was also the first scientist-astronaut, geologist Harrison Schmitt. While Evans circled in America, Schmitt and Cernan collected a record 109 kg of rocks during three Moonwalks. The crew roamed for 34 km through the Taurus-Littrow valley in their rover, discovered orange-colored soil, and left the most comprehensive set of instruments in the ALSEP on the lunar surface. Their mission was the last in the Apollo lunar landing missions. The last 4 Apollo crafts were used for the three Skylab missions and the ASTP, mission in 1975.
Crew members were Eugene Cernan, commander; Ron Evans, command module pilot; and Harrison Schmitt, lunar module pilot.
The landing site for this mission was on the southeastern rim of the Mare Serenitatis, in the southwestern Montes Taurus. This was a dark mantle between three high, steep massifs, in an area known as the Taurus-Littrow region. Pre-mission photographs showed boulders deposited along the bases of the mountains, which could provide bedrock samples. The area also contained a landslide, several impact craters, and some dark craters which could be volcanic.
A J-class mission, featuring the Lunar Rover, they conducted three lunar surface excursions, lasting 7.2, 7.6 and 7.3 hours. The mission returned 110.5 kg of samples from the Moon.
On this mission the astronauts took a famous photograph of the earth known as "The Blue Marble", which almost shows the entire continent of Africa and the continent of Antarctica. The other lunar landing missions that photographed the earth shortly after lunar orbit insertion showed the western hemisphere.
"Ah! You see one Earth, you've seen them all."
"As I take man's last step from the surface, back home for some time to come — but we believe not too long into the future — I'd like to just what I believe history will record — that America's challenge of today has forged man's destiny of tomorrow. And, as we leave the Moon at Taurus-Littrow, we leave as we came and, God willing, as we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind. Godspeed the crew of Apollo 17."
The circular patch is one of the most detailed of the Apollo series. The official NASA press release said: "The insignia is dominated by the image of Apollo, the Greek sun god. Suspended in space behind the head of Apollo is an American eagle of contemporary design, the red bars of the eagle's wing represent the bars in the U.S. flag; the three white stars symbolize the three astronaut crewmen. The background is deep blue space and within it are the Moon, the planet Saturn and a spiral galaxy or nebula. The Moon is partially overlaid by the eagle's wing suggesting that this is a celestial body that man has visited and in that sense conquered. The thrust of the eagle and the gaze of Apollo to the right and toward Saturn and the galaxy is meant to imply that man's goals in space will someday include the planets and perhaps the stars. The colors of the emblem are red, white and blue, the colors of the U.S. flag; with the addition of gold, to symbolize the golden age of space flight that will begin with this Apollo 17 lunar landing. The Apollo image used in this emblem was the Apollo of Belvedere sculpture now in the Vatican Gallery in Rome. This emblem was designed by artist Robert T. McCall in collaboration with the astronauts." The insignia is surrounded by a light gray band with names of the crew and the words APOLLO XVII.
નિયંત્રણ મોડ્યુલ અમેરિકા હાલમાં 'સ્પેશ સેન્ટર હ્યુસ્ટન'en:Space Center Houston, હ્યુસ્ટન, ટેક્ષાસ ખાતે જોવા મળે છે.
લુનાર મોડ્યુલ ચેલેન્જર ડિસેમ્બર ૧૫,૧૯૭૨ નાં રોજ ૦૬:૫૦:૨૦.૮ UT સમયે ચંદ્ર પર ૧૯.૯૬ N, ૩૦.૫૦ E સ્થળે ઉતારવામાં આવ્યું.
અવકાશ યાત્રી હૈરીસન સ્મિટ મૂનવોક વખતે.
હૈરીસન સ્મિટ ગીત ગાય છે. "હું એક દિવસ ચંદ્ર પર ફરીશ" 
એપોલો ૧૭ નું ચંદ્રયાન ધડાકા સાથે પ્રજ્જવલીત થઇ અને ચંદ્રને ત્યજે છે.
Portions of the Apollo 17 mission are dramatized in the miniseries From the Earth to the Moon episode entitled "Le Voyage dans la Lune".
The novel Tyrannosaur Canyon by Douglas Preston opens with a depiction of the Apollo 17 moonwalks using quotes taken from the official mission transcript.
Additionally, there have been fictional astronauts in film, literature and television who have been described as "the last man to walk on the moon," implying they were crew members on Apollo 17. One such character was Steve Austin in the television series The Six Million Dollar Man. In the 1972 novel Cyborg, upon which the series was based, Austin remembers watching the Earth "fall away during Apollo XVII."  In an episode of the series, Austin clearly states that he flew on "Apollo 17". Another example is the character of Captain Tanner in the science fiction film Deep Impact.
The mission patch for Apollo 17 was used for the mission patch for the NASA space ship Charybdis in an episode of "Star Trek: The Next Generation" entitled "The Royale".
In WALL-E, the main characters flying away from Earth pass the Moon and the landing site of Apollo 17 . Behind the landing site one sees a large sign on the lunar surface exclaiming the future site of a shopping mall.
