An expressway is a controlled-access highway; it is a highway that controls entrances to it and exits from it by incorporating the design of the slip roads for entry and exit into the design of the highway itself. Access-control should not be confused with collection of toll. An expressway may be free to use and may not collect toll at all. Expressways are the highest class of roads in the Indian Road Network. These are six- or eight-lane highways with controlled-access. India has approximately 942 km expressways.
National Highway system of India consists of approximately 10,000 kilometres of four-laned highways that collect toll from users but do not have control of access and cannot be called expressways. Currently, a massive project is underway to expand the highway network and the Government of India plans to add an additional 18,637 kilometres of expressways to the network by the year 2022. These roads will be access-controlled roads and will feature between four and six lanes with 3,530 kilometres km to come up by 2015. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is already in the process of preparing a draft for creation of a National Expressways Authority of India on the lines of NHAI.
This list includes roads without access-control. Such a road cannot be called "expressway" though the name of the road may include the word "expressway" and may be a misnomer. Such a road should be excluded from this list. Eastern and Western Express Highways in Mumbai are two examples of such roads. Ambala-Chandigarh NH is another such example as it does not have access control for entry and exit at predetermined points. As stated above, access-control is different from collection of toll.
NHAI has proposed the following two Expressways in the NHDP VI.
The Uttar Pradesh government is planning five more expressways in the state. The five proposed expressways will have a combined length of around 750 kilometres .
The five expressways would be
India has the third-largest road network in the world spanning 4.69 million km, next in line only to the US and China. However, when it comes to the quality of roads, India lags far behind. Compared to the length of expressways in leading countries, China, the US, Canada, Spain and Germany, India’s progress in the road sector seems dwarfed at just 200 km.
On an overall basis also, highways constitute only a 1.7 per cent share at 79,116 km.
Given the importance of expressways, the Government of India had approved the construction of 1,000 km of expressways under the National Highways Development Project Phase VI.
Besides, the ministry came up with a project report to formulate a master plan aiming to construct 15,600 km by 2022, marking the end of the 13th five year plan.
Given the current precarious economic conditions, constructing expressways through the EPC route seems to be the most pragmatic approach. The government can raise long-term debt through bonds or low-cost foreign loans from multi-lateral and bilateral institutions while revenue can be generated by charging tolls from vehicles at entry and exit points.
Also, as witnessed in other countries, state governments should be urged to increase contribution toward these projects, as they will be the key beneficiaries of expressways.
Another way to expedite the process could be that the government could develop the first 50–100 km of the expressway to attract private developers, a model being followed by Jaipur metro.
Once traffic picks up on the expressway, developers could construct the remaining length and be allowed to charge toll on the entire length.
If India needs to achieve the next level in highway development, it has to focus on transit efficiency. For this, the country will have to increase reliance on public funding and shift focus from PPP.
It could also opt for innovative financial models, as suggested above, to make expressway construction a viable business in the country.
^ "Vadodara-Mumbai Expressway". Times of India. 2010-08-18. Retrieved 2010-08-19.






