ઋગ્વેદ મુજબ ભગવાન રુદ્ર તીવ્ર પવન અને સંહારક દેવ છે. દુષ્ટોને રડાવે એવી ગર્જના કરવાથી તેમને રુદ્ર કહેવામાં આવે છે . 
The theonym Shiva originates as an epithet of Rudra, the adjective shiva "kind" being used euphemistically of the god who in the Rigveda also carries the epithet ghora "terrible". Usage of the epithet came to exceed the original theonym and by the post-Vedic period, the name Rudra is taken as a synonym for god Shiva and the two names are used interchangeably. Also, it is said that God Shiva is a form of "Rudra". 
The etymology of the theonym Rudra is somewhat uncertain.  It is usually derived from the root rud- which means "to cry, howl." According to this etymology, the name Rudra has been translated as "the Roarer". An alternate etymology suggested by Prof. Pischel derives Rudra from a lost root rud-, "to be red" or "to be ruddy", or according to Grassman, "to shine". Stella Kramrisch notes a different etymology connected with the adjectival form raudra, which means wild, of rudra nature, and translates the name Rudra as "the Wild One" or "the Fierce God". R. K. Sharma follows this alternate etymology and translates the name as "Terrible" in his glossary for the Shiva Sahasranama. 
The commentator Sāyaṇa suggests six possible derivations for rudra. However, another reference states that Sayana suggested ten derivations. 
The adjective shivam in the sense of "propitious" or "kind" is applied to the name Rudra in RV 10.92.9. According to Gavin Flood, Shiva used as a name or title occurs only in the late Vedic Katha Aranyaka Axel Michaels says Rudra was called Shiva for the first time in the Śvetāśvatara Upanishad. 
Rudra is called "The Archer" and the arrow is an essential attribute of Rudra. This name appears in the Shiva Sahasranama, and R. K. Sharma notes that it is used as a name of Shiva often in later languages. The word is derived from the Sanskrit root śarv- which means "to injure" or "to kill" and Sharma uses that general sense in his interpretive translation of the name Śarva as "One who can kill the forces of darkness". The names Dhanvin and Bāṇahasta also refer to archery.
In other contexts the word rudra can simply mean "the number eleven".
The word "rudraksha", or "eye of Rudra", is used as a name both for the berry of the Rudraksha tree, and a name for a string of the prayer beads made from those seeds.
The earliest mentions of Rudra occur in the Rigveda, where three entire hymns are devoted to him. There are about seventy-five references to Rudra in the Rigveda overall. 
In the Rigveda Rudra's role as a frightening god is apparent in references to him as ghora, or simply as asau devam . He is "fierce like a formidable wild beast" . Chakravarti sums up the perception of Rudra by saying:
RV 1.114 is an appeal to Rudra for mercy, where he is referred to as "mighty Rudra, the god with braided hair."
In RV 7.46, Rudra is described as armed with a bow and fast-flying arrows. As quoted by R. G. Bhandarkar, the hymn says Rudra discharges "brilliant shafts which run about the heaven and the earth", which may be a reference to the destructive power of lightning.
Rudra was believed to cause disease, and when people recovered from them or were free of them, that too was attributed to the agency of Rudra. He is asked not to afflict children with disease and to keep villages free of illness . He is said to have healing remedies, as the best physician of physicians, and as possessed of a thousand medicines . This is described in Shiva's alternative name Vaidyanatha .
The verse RV 6.49.10 calls Rudra as " The Father of the Universe" 
bṛhantaṃ ṛṣvamajaraṃ suṣumnaṃ ṛdhagh ghuvema kavineṣitāsaḥ 
Translation:

The verse RV 2.33.9 calls Rudra as "The Lord or Sovereign of the Universe" 
īśānādasya bhuvanasya bhūrerna vā u yoṣad rudrādasuryam 
Translation:
Rudra is used both as a name of Shiva and collectively as the name for the Maruts. Gavin Flood characterizes the Maruts as "storm gods", associated with the atmosphere. They are a group of gods, supposed to be either eleven or thirty-three in number. The number of Maruts varies from two to sixty .
The Rudras are sometimes referred to as "the sons of Rudra". Rudra is referred to as "Father of the Maruts" in RV 2.33.1.
Rudra is mentioned along with a litany of other deities in RV 7.40.5. Here is the reference to Rudra, whose name appears as one of many gods who are called upon:
This Varuṇa, the leader of the rite, and the royal Mitra and Aryaman, uphold my acts, and the divine unopposed Aditi, earnestly invoked: may they convey us safe beyond evil.
I propitiate with oblations the ramifications of that divine attainable Viṣṇu, the showerer of benefits. Rudra, bestow upon us the magnificence of his nature. The Aśvins have come down to our dwelling abounding with food.
One scholiast interpretation of the Sanskrit word vayāḥ, meaning "ramifications" or "branches", is that all other deities are, as it were branches of Vishnu, but Ralph T. H. Griffith cites Ludwig as saying "This... gives no satisfactory interpretation" and cites other views which suggest that the text is corrupt at that point.
In the various recensions of the Yajurveda is included a litany of stanzas praising Rudra: . This litany is subsequently referred to variously as the Śatarudriyam, the Namakam, or simply the Rudram. This litany was recited during the agnicayana ritual, and it later became a standard element in Rudra liturgy.
A selection of these stanzas, augmented with others, is included in the Paippalāda-Saṃhitā of the Atharvaveda . This selection, with further PS additions at the end, circulated more widely as the Nīlarudram .
The 10th Sikh Guru, Guru Gobind Singh describes the incarnation of Lord Shiva in his book the Dasam Granth, the Canto is titled Rudra Avatar
