કૈલાશ સત્યાર્થી  બાળકોના હક્કોના આંદોલનકારી છે અને બાળ મજૂરી સામે ચાલતી વૈશ્વિક લડતમાં એક આગળ પડતું નામ છે . તેમણે ૧૯૮૦માં 'બચપન બચાઓ આંદોલન' નામની સંસ્થાની સ્થાપના કરી અને ૧૪૪ દેશોના ૮૩,૦૦૦થી વધુ બાળકોના હક્કો બચાવવા માટે લડત આપી છે. આંતરરાષ્ટ્રીય મજૂર સંગઠને બાળ મજૂરીના સૌથી ખરાબ પ્રકાર પરના કન્વેન્શન નંબર ૧૮૨ને અપનાવ્યું તેની પાછળનું પ્રેરકબળ કૈલાશ સત્યાર્થીએ કરેલાં કામ અને ચલાવેલા આંદોલનને જ ગણવામાં આવે છે. આ કન્વેન્શન આજે વિશ્વભરની સરકારો માટે પાયારૂપ માર્ગદર્શિકા છે.
તેમના કાર્યોની સરાહના અનેક રાષ્ટીય અને આંતરરાષ્ટ્રીય ખિતાબો અને પારિતોષિકોથી કરવામાં આવી છે, જેમાં વર્ષ ૨૦૧૪ના શાંતિ માટેના નોબેલ પારિતોષિકનો સમાવેશ થાય છે. આ પારિતોષિક તેમને અને મલાલા યુસફઝાઇને સંયુક્તપણે મળ્યો છે.
He was born on 11 January 1954 in the Vidisha district of Madhya Pradesh. Originally named Kailash Sharma, he later took the name Kailash Satyarthi.
He attended Government Boys Higher Secondary School, and completed his degree in electrical engineering at Samrat Ashok Technological Institute, Vidisha and a post-graduate degree in high-voltage engineering. He then joined a college in Bhopal as a lecturer for a few years.
In 1980, he gave up his career as a teacher and became secretary general for the Bonded Labor Liberation Front; he also founded the Bachpan Bachao Andolan that year. He has also been involved with the Global March Against Child Labor and its international advocacy body, the International Center on Child Labor and Education, which are worldwide coalitions of NGOs, teachers and trades unionists. He has also served as the President of the Global Campaign for Education, from its inception in 1999 to 2011, having been one of its four founders alongside ActionAid, Oxfam and Education International.
In addition, he established Rugmark as the first voluntary labelling, monitoring and certification system of rugs manufactured without the use of child-labour in South Asia. This latter organisation operated a campaign in Europe and the United States in the late 1980s and early 1990s with the intent of raising consumer awareness of the issues relating to the accountability of global corporations with regard to socially responsible consumerism and trade. Satyarthi has highlighted child labor as a human rights issue as well as a welfare matter and charitable cause. He has argued that it perpetuates poverty, unemployment, illiteracy, population growth, and other social problems, and his claims have been supported by several studies. He has also had a role in linking the movement against child labour with efforts for achieving "Education for All". He has been a member of a UNESCO body established to examine this and has been on the board of the Fast Track Initiative . Satyarthi serves on the board and committee of several international organisations including the Center for Victims of Torture, the International Labor Rights Fund, and the International Cocoa Foundation. He is now reportedly working on bringing child labour and slavery into the post-2015 development agenda for the United Nation's Millennium Development Goals.
Satyarthi, along with Pakistani activist Malala Yousufzai, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2014 "for their struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education". Satyarthi is the fifth Nobel Prize winner for India and only the second Indian winner of the Nobel Peace Prize after Mother Teresa in 1979.
કૈલાશભાઈ નવી દિલ્હીમાં રહે છે. તેમના પરિવારમાં તેમની પત્ની, એક પુત્ર, પુત્રવધુ અને પુત્રીનો સમાવેશ થાય છે. તેમના સામાજીક આંદોલન સિવાયના જીવનમાં તેઓ ઉમદા રસોઈ બનાવનાર તરીકે પણ ઓળખાવવામાં આવે છે.
Satyarthi has been the subject of a number of documentaries, television series, talk shows, advocacy and awareness films. Satyarthi has been awarded the following national and international honours:
