
વોટ નાઉ એ ન્યુઝીલેન્ડનાં ટેલીવિઝન પડદા પર લાંબા સમયથી ચાલ્યો આવતો એક બાળકો માટેનો કાર્યક્રમ છે, જેનું સૌ પ્રથમ પ્રસારણ ૧૯૮૧માં થયું હતું. તેનું રેકોર્ડીંગ ન્યુઝીલેન્ડનાં ક્રાઇસ્ટચર્ચ નગરમાં આવેલા સ્ટુડિઓમાં પ્રેક્ષકોની ઉપસ્થિતિમાં કરવામાં આવે છે.
The current show has cartoons such as Class of 3000 and segments such as Game Zone, SLAM!, Foul's Kitchen and Brain Freeze. There are also weekly competitions. It has a group of people who answer the phones between the current hours of 8:00AM and 10:00AM and they have been given the name "Teleops", a portmanteau of telephone and operator. They are there to enter the children who call the show into competitions and give them information.
What Now? was created by Rex Simpson before he left to head up his own production company, Kids TV. It originally screened on Saturday mornings on TV ONE between 7:30am and 10am. Hosted by Steve Parr, he introduced segments covering morning keep-fit exercises, sketches involving recurring characters such as complaining old man Clive Grumble, simple recipes by Alison Holst, trivia from Frank Flash, law and safety with Constable Keith and Sniff, interspersed with regular cartoons. The theme song was Get Out of Your Lazy Bed, by Matt Bianco.
When Steve Parr left the show after a couple of years, the format changed to live broadcast, which allowed it to be more interactive. The hosts increased in number, usually to three, beginning with Danny Watson and Michelle Bracey added, and Frank Flash given a more central comedic manic role. When Michelle left the show, she was succeeded by Michele A'Court. Comedy sketches, interactive phone calls and competitions with the viewing audience, plus magazine-style segments going out and about, all became a more central part of the format. 
The style remained this way for many years, as hosts evolved and were replaced, until today where the format now involves live audiences of crowds of children, but still is closely faithful with the core concept established early on.
In 1989 the show moved to TV2 and then in 1996 to Sunday mornings. An after school version of What Now also ran on TV 2 during the week between 1997 and 2002. 
The show was moved to TVNZ's Avalon studios in Lower Hutt in the late nineties until it was moved back to Christchurch in 2004 to be produced by independent company Whitebait Productions, headed by Janine Morrell-Gunn and Jason Gunn. What Now? has been funded by NZ On Air since NZOA's inception in 1989; prior to that it was funded by TVNZ.
In 2004 the afternoon show was cancelled and replaced with the current children's afternoon TV show Studio 2. 
Various programme partnerships over the years have seen What Now? promoting ‘healthy eating healthy action', water safety and old-fashioned letter writing amongst many other things. What Now? has a long-standing association with the Weetbix Kiwi Kids Tryathlon, and with Sport and Recreation New Zealand whose ‘Push Play' message encourages children to be physically active.
Early What Now? presenters were also credited as writers. They were people like Michelle A'Court, Danny Watson, Al Kincaid, Michelle Bracey, Simon Barnett and Catherine McPherson, some of whom have gone on to roles as directors and writers. A more recent presenter who made a significant behind-the-scenes contribution was Anthony Samuels, who also trained as a director.
Off-screen personnel who have shaped What Now? over the years are many. They include camera operator and director Alan Henderson, Directors Keith Tyler-Smith, Bill de Friez, Peter Verstappen, Mark Owers, Mike Ritchie, Jason Gunn and Richard Hansen. Producers include Richard Driver, Tony Palmer, Anne Williams, and Janine Morrell-Gunn. Emma Gribble got her start opening the mail for the fan club and 10 years later became producer of the show.
Throughout the years What Now? has maintained the use of gunge and slime. Children, celebrities, parents and sometimes the presenters are often the subject of embarrasment in various gunge games. Examples include Fill Ya Pants, Foam a Friend, Flushed Away, Gunge on the Run, Weekly Gunge Games, The Gunge Machine, Tank of Terror, Super Circuit, and general gunging.
