આ યુરોપીય દેશોની યાદી છે, જેમાં જે-તે દેશ નામ અંગ્રેજીમાં તેમજ સ્થાનિક ભાષામાં આપવામાં આવેલ છે, તથા તેના પાટનગરોની પણ જાણકારી આપેલ છે.
The divisions between Asia and Europe occur at the Ural Mountains, Ural River and Caspian Sea in the east, the Caucasus Mountains and the Black Sea with its outlets, Bosporus and Dardanelles in the south. Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Russia and Turkey are considered part of both Europe and Asia. Armenia and Cyprus are sociopolitical European countries. Islands in the Mediterranean Sea are generally part of Europe. Malta is a part of Europe. 
A state is a political association with effective sovereignty over a geographic area. A state usually includes the set of institutions that claim the authority to make the rules that govern the exercise of coercive violence for the people of the society in that territory, though its status as a state often depends in part on being recognized by a number of other states as having internal and external sovereignty over it. In sociology, the state is normally identified with these institutions: in Max Weber's influential definition, it is that organization that has a "monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory," which may include the armed forces, civil service or state bureaucracy, courts, and police.
Republic of Bulgaria
યુરોપનાં પરાધીન ક્ષેત્રો અને સ્વાયત્ત પ્રદેશો
The following geo-political entities in Europe have partial diplomatic recognition by one or more sovereign states and are defined as 'states' by the declarative theory of statehood.
The following geo-political entities in Europe lack diplomatic recognition, yet are defined as 'states' by the declarative theory of statehood.
Romanian Transliteration: Republica Moldovenească NistreanăRussian: Приднестро́вская Молда́вская Респу́бликаRussian Transliteration: Pridnestrovskaya Moldavskaya Respublikaઢાંચો:Lang-ukUkrainian Transliteration: Pridnistrovs'ka Moldavs'ka Respublika
ઢાંચો:Lists of countries by continentઢાંચો:Europe topics 
