ભારતીય રૂપિયોએ ભારતનું રાષ્ટ્રીય ચલણ છે. જેનું નિયમન ભારતીય રિઝર્વ બેંક કરે છે. આધુનીક રૂપીયાને ૧૦૦ પૈસામાં વિભાજીત કરવામાં આવ્યો છે. ચલણની દૃષ્ટીએ જોઇએ તો ૧, ૨, ૫, ૧૦ રૂપિયાનાં સિક્કાઓ છે. અને ૫, ૧૦, ૨૦, ૫૦, ૧૦૦, ૫૦૦ અને ૨૦૦૦ રૂપિયાની નોટો ચલણમાં છે. રૂપિયાનું નવું ચિહ્ન દેવનાગરી લિપીના र અને લેટીન Rનું સંયોજન કરીને બનાવવામાં આવ્યું છે જે હવે આંતર્રાષ્ટ્રીય બજારોમાં ભારતીય ચલણનું પ્રતિનીધીત્વ કરે છે. 
આમતો ભારતનાં મોટા ભાગમાં રૂપિયાને રૂપિયાના નામ થીજ ઓળખવામાં આવે છે છતાં પણ તેનાં કેટલાક પ્રાદેશીક નામો પણ છે, જેવાકે: રૂબૈઇ ; રૂપિયા ; રૂપિયો ગુજરાતી; રૂપૈય તેલુગુ ; કન્નડ અને તુલુ, રુપા મલયાલમ ; રૂપયે મરાઠી . આ ઉપરાંત બીજી ભાષામાં જોઈએ તો તેને સંસ્કુતમાં रूप्यकम् - રૂપ્યકમ્ કહેવામાં અવે છે. સંસ્કૃતમાં રૌપ્યનો અર્થ થાય છે, ચાંદી અને રુપ્યકમ્ એટલે ચાંદીની મુદ્રા . જો કે, પશ્ચિમ બંગાળા, ત્રિપુરા, મિઝોરમ, ઓરિસ્સા અને આસામમાં ભારતીય રુપિયાનું અધિકૃત નામ સંસ્કૃત શબ્દ टङ्क ટંકમાંથી ઉદ્ભવતા વિવિધ શબ્દોનું બનેલું છે. આમ, બંગાળીમાં રુપિયાને ટાકા, આસામીઝમાં ટોકા અને ઉડિયામાં ટંકા કહેવામાં આવે છે અને એ પ્રમાણે જ ચલણી નોટો પર તેમને લખવામાં આવે છે.
૫ માર્ચ ૨૦૦૯ના રોજ ભારત સરકારે રૂપિયા માટે એક વૈશ્વિક પ્રતીકચિહ્ન બનાવવા માટે સ્પર્ધાની જાહેરાત કરી હતી. ૨૦૧૦નાં કેન્દ્રીય અંદાજપત્ર દરમિયાન તત્કાલિન નાણા પ્રધાન પ્રણવ મુખર્જીએ સૂચવ્યું હતું કે પ્રસ્તાવિત ચિહ્ન ભારતીય મૂલ્યો અને સંસ્કૃતિની ઝલક સમું હશે અને તેને પ્રતિબિંબિત કરતું હશે. પાંચ પ્રતીકોની તારવણી કરવામાં આવી હતી અને તેમાંથી કેબિનેટે ૧૫ જુલાઇ ૨૦૧૦ના રોજ ડી. ઉદય કુમારે બનાવેલાં આ ચિહ્ન પર પસંદગી ઢોળી હતી.
આ ચિન્હ દેવનાગરી લિપીના ‘र’ અક્ષરમાંથી લેવામાં આવ્યુ છે. ઊપરની સમાન્તર રેખાઓ ત્રિરંગાની આભા આપે છે અને દેશની આર્થીક અસમાનતાદૂર કરવાની ઇચ્છા દર્શાવે છે. The Indian government will try to adopt the symbol within six months in the country and globally within 18 to 24 months. Prior to this, the most commonly used symbols for the rupee have been ₨., Re. or रू.
મોટી સંખ્યામાં રૂપિયાની ગણતરી હજાર, લાખ, કરોડ અને અબજ માં કરવામાં આવે છે. અંગ્રેજી ચલણમાં વપરાતા મિલિયન અને બિલિયન એવા એકમોનો ઉપયોગ ભારતીય પ્રણાલિમાં ખૂબ જ ઓછો છે.
દાખલા તરીખે, સંખ્યા રૂ. ૩,૨૫,૫૪,૭૨૯.૨૫ સામાન્ય રીતે ત્રણ કરોડ પચ્ચીસ લાખ ચોપ્પન હજાર સાતસો ઓગણત્રીસ અને પચ્ચીસ પૈસા એમ બોલવામાં આવે છે.
પ્રાચિન સમયમાં સિક્કાનો ઉપયોગ કરનારા દેશોમાં એક દેશ ભારત પણ હતો . ભારતમાં ઇ.સ્.પુર્વે ૬ સદીથી સિક્કાનું ચલણ છે. પુરાતત્વ સંશોધનમાં મળેલા સિક્કા પરથી જાણી શકાય છેકે હડપ્પીય સંસ્કૃતિમાં પણ સિક્કાનું ચલણ હતું ,જે ઇ.સ્.પુર્વે ૨૫૦૦ થી ૧૭૫૦ દરમ્યાનં પાંગરી હતી પહેલો રૂપિયો બનાવનાર શેર શાહ સુરીરાજા હતો, જેનું મુલ્ય ૪૦ તાંબાની પાઇ જેટલું હતું. ૧ રૂપિયાનીં પ્રથમ ચલણીનોટ "બેંક ઓફ હિંદુસ્તાન" દ્વાર બહાર પડાઇ, ત્યાર બાદ જનરલ બેંક ઓફ બંગાળ અને બિહાર બંગાળ બેંક ,તથા મદ્રાસ નીં બેંકે પણ રૂપિયાનું ચલણ રાખ્યું જેનું મુલ્ય ૧૨ ફેનમ = ૧ રૂપિયો હતું.
Historically, the rupee, derived from the Sanskrit word raupya, which means silver, was a silver coin. This had severe consequences in the nineteenth century, when the strongest economies in the world were on the gold standard. The discovery of vast quantities of silver in the U.S. and various European colonies resulted in a decline in the relative value of silver to gold. Suddenly the standard currency of India could not buy as much from the outside world. This event was known as "the fall of the rupee".
India was not affected by the imperial order-in-council of 1825 that attempted to introduce the British sterling coinage to the British colonies. British India at that time was controlled by the British East India Company. The silver rupee continued as the currency of India throughout the entire period of the British Raj and beyond. In 1835, British India set itself firmly upon a mono-metallic silver standard based on the rupee. His decision was influenced by a letter, written in the year 1805, by Lord Liverpool that extolled the virtues of mono-metallism.
Following the Indian Mutiny in 1857, the British government took direct control of British India. Since 1851, gold sovereigns were being produced in large numbers at the Royal Mint branch in Sydney, New South Wales. In the year 1864 in an attempt to make the British gold sovereign become the 'imperial coin', the treasuries in Bombay and Calcutta were instructed to receive gold sovereigns. These gold sovereigns however never left the vaults. As was realized in the previous decade in Canada and the next year in Hong Kong, existing habits are not easy to replace. And just as the British government had finally given up any hopes of replacing the rupee in India with the pound sterling, they simultaneously realized, and for the same reasons, that they couldn't easily replace the silver dollar in the Straits Settlements with the Indian rupee, as had been the desire of the British East India Company.
Since the great silver crisis of 1873, a growing number of nations had been adopting the gold standard. In 1898, following the recommendations of the Indian Currency Committee, British India officially adopted the gold exchange standard by pegging the rupee to the British pound sterling at a fixed value of 1 shilling 4 pence . In 1920, the actual silver value of the rupee was increased in value to 2 shillings . In British East Africa at this time, the decision was made to replace the rupee with a florin. No such opportunity was, however, taken in British India.
In 1927, the peg was once more reduced, this time to 18 pence . This peg was maintained until 1966, when the rupee was devalued and pegged to the U.S. dollar at a rate of 7.5 rupees = 1 dollar . This peg lasted until the U.S. dollar devalued in 1971.
The Indian rupee replaced the Danish Indian rupee in 1845, the French Indian rupee in 1954 and the Portuguese Indian escudo in 1961. Following independence in 1947, the Indian rupee replaced all the currencies of the previously autonomous states. Some of these states had issued rupees equal to those issued by the British . Other currencies included the Hyderabad rupee and the Kutch kori. Nominal value during British rule, and the first decade of independence:
In 1957, decimalisation occurred and the rupee was divided into 100 naye paise . In 1964, the initial "naye" was dropped. Many still refer to 25, 50 and 75 paise as 4, 8 and 12 annas respectively, not unlike the usage of "bit" in American English for ⅛ dollar.rupee bill historical.jpgImage:in2av.jpg | The two-rupee banknoteImage:French1rupee.jpg | French Indian 1 rupee Image:Rupee_One_-_Obverse.jpg | One rupee — Obverse

In East Africa, Arabia, and Mesopotamia the Rupee and its subsidiary coinage was current at various times. The usage of the Rupee in East Africa extended from Somalia in the north, to as far south as Natal. In Mozambique the British India rupees were overstamped, and in Kenya the British East Africa Company minted the rupee and its fractions as well as pice. The rise in the price of silver immediately after the First World War caused the rupee to rise in value to two shillings sterling. In 1920 in British East Africa, the opportunity was then taken to introduce a new florin coin, hence bringing the currency into line with sterling. Shortly after that, the Florin was split into two East African shillings. This assimilation to sterling did not however happen in British India itself. In Somalia the Italian colonial authority minted 'rupia' to the exact same standard, and called the pice 'besa'.
The Straits Settlements were originally an outlier of the British East India Company. The Spanish dollar had already taken hold in the Straits Settlements by the time the British arrived in the nineteenth century, however, the East India Company tried to introduce the rupee in its place. These attempts were resisted by the locals, and by 1867 when the British government took over direct control of the Straits Settlements from the East India Company, attempts to introduce the rupee were finally abandoned.
ભારત નાં ભાગલાનીં સાથે પાકિસ્તાની રૂપિયો અસ્તિત્વમાં આવ્યો,પહેલાનાં સમયમાં ભારતીય રૂપિયો દુનિયાનાં ઘણા દેશોનું માન્ય ચલણ હતું જેવાકે એડન, ઓમાન, કુવૈત, બેહરીન, કતાર, the Trucial States, કેન્યા, Tanganyika, યુગાન્ડા, the Seychelles, and Mauritius વગેરે.
The Indian government introduced the Gulf rupee, also known as the Persian Gulf rupee, as a replacement for the Indian rupee for circulation exclusively outside the country with the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1 May 1959. This creation of a separate currency was an attempt to reduce the strain put on India's foreign reserves by gold smuggling. After India devalued the rupee on 6 June 1966, those countries still using it – Oman, Qatar, and the Trucial States – replaced the Gulf rupee with their own currencies. Kuwait and Bahrain had already done so in 1961 and 1965 respectively.
The Bhutanese ngultrum is pegged at par with the Indian rupee, and both currencies are accepted in Bhutan. The Indian rupee is also accepted in towns in Nepal which lie near the border with India.
કાળા નાણા અને નકલી નોટો પ્રભાવ વધવાને લીધે ૮ નવેમ્બર, ૨૦૧૬ ના રોજ રાત્રે ૮ વાગ્યે વડાપ્રધાન શ્રી નરેન્દ્ર મોદી એ રૂપિયા ૫૦૦ અને ૧૦૦૦ની નોટોનું વિમુદ્રીકરણ કરેલું. ત્યારબાદ રૂપિયા ૨૦૦૦ની નવી નોટો અને ૨૦૧૬ના અંત સુધીમાં રૂપિયા ૫૦૦ની નવી નોટો જાહેર થઈ.
ઇસ્ટ ઇન્ડિયા કંપનીએ ભારતમાં ૩ રાજ્યો સ્થાપ્યા હતાં જેમાંહતાં. ૧૮૩૫ સુધીમાં દરેક રાજ્યએ પોતાનાં સિક્કા બાહર પાડ્યા હતા.જેમાં ત્રણેય રાજ્યોએ ચાંદીનોં રૂપિયાનો સિક્કો બહાર પાડ્યો હતો જેનું મુલ્ય ⅛ ફ્રાંક હતું, મદ્રાસ રાજ્યે તો બે રૂપિયાનો સિક્કો પણ બહાર પાડ્યો હતો.ત્યાર બાદ તાંબાના સિક્કાનું ચલણ વધ્યું.બંગાળે ૧ પાઇ, ½, ૧ અને ૨ પૈસા બહાર પાડ્યા તો મુંબઇએ ૧ પાઇ, ¼, ½, ૧, 1½, ૨ અને ૪ પૈસા. તથા મદ્રાસે ૨, ૪ પાઇ, ૧, ૨ અને ૪ પૈસા, with the first two denominated as ½ and 1 dub or 1⁄96 and 1⁄48 rupee. Note that Madras also issued the Madras fanam until 1815.
All three Presidencies issued gold mohurs and fractions of mohurs, including 1⁄16, ⅛, ¼ and ½ in Bengal, 1⁄15 and ⅓ in Bombay and ¼, ⅓ and ½ in Madras.
In 1835, a single coinage for the EIC was introduced. It consisted of copper 1⁄12, ¼ and ½ anna, silver ¼, ½ and 1 rupee and gold 1 and 2 mohurs. In 1841, silver 2 annas were added, followed by copper ½ pice in 1853. The coinage of the EIC continued to be issued until 1862, even after the Company had been taken over by the Crown.
In 1862, coins were introduced which are referred to as Regal issues. They bore the portrait of Queen Victoria and the designation "India". Denominations were 1⁄12 anna, ½ pice, ¼ and ½ anna, 2 annas, ¼, ½ and 1 rupee and 5 and 10 rupees and 1 mohur . The gold denominations ceased production in 1891 while no ½ anna coins were issued dated later than 1877.
In 1906, bronze replaced copper for the lowest three denominations and in 1907, a cupro-nickel 1 anna was introduced. In 1918 and 1919, cupro-nickel 2, 4 and 8 annas were introduced, although the 4 and 8 annas coins were only issued until 1921 and did not replace their silver equivalents. Also in 1918, the Bombay mint struck gold sovereigns and 15 rupee coins identical in size to the sovereigns as an emergency measure due to the First World War.
In the early 1940s, several changes were implemented. The 1⁄12 anna and ½ pice ceased production, the ¼ anna was changed to a bronze, holed coin, cupro-nickel and nickel-brass ½ anna coins were introduced, nickel-brass was used to produce some 1 and 2 annas coins, and the composition of the silver coins was reduced from 91.7% to 80%. The last of the regal issues were cupro-nickel ¼, ½ and 1 rupee pieces minted in 1946 and 1947.
India's first coins after independence were issued in 1950. They were 1 pice, ½, 1 and 2 annas, ¼, ½ and 1 rupee denominations. The sizes and compositions were the same as the final Regal issues, except for the 1 pice, which was bronze but not holed.
The first decimal issues of India consisted of 1, 2, 5, 10, 25 & 50 naye paise, as well as 1 rupee. The 1 naya paisa was bronze, the 2, 5 & 10 naye paise were cupro-nickel & the 25 & 50 naye paise & 1 rupee were nickel. In 1964, the word naya was removed from all the coins. Between 1964 & 1967, aluminum 1, 2, 3, 5 & 10 paise were introduced. In 1968, nickel-brass 20 paise were introduced, replaced by aluminum coins in 1982. Between 1972 & 1975, cupro-nickel replaced nickel in the 25 & 50 paise as well as the 1 rupee. In 1982, cupro-nickel 2 rupees coins were introduced. In 1988, stainless steel 10, 25 & 50 paise were introduced, followed by 1 & 5 rupee coins in 1992.Recently 5 Rupee coins made from Brass are being minted by RBI
Between 2005 & 2008, new, lighter 50 paise, 1, 2 & 5 rupee coins were introduced, all struck in ferritic stainless steel. The move was prompted by the melting down of older coins whose face value was less than their scrap value.
The coins commonly in circulation are 1, 2, 5 & 10 rupees. Although they remain valid, paise coins have become increasingly rare in regular usage.

The coins are minted at the four locations of the India Government Mint. Note the 1, 2 & 5 rupee coins have been minted since independence. Coins minted with the "Hand Picture" are 2005 onwards.
૧૮૬૧માં તે વખતની સરકારે કાગળી ચલણ અમલમાં મુક્યું, ૧૮૮૪માં ૧૦ રૂપિયા, ૧૮૯૨માં ૫ રૂપિયા, ૧૮૯૯માં ૧૦,૦૦૦ રૂપિયા, ૧૯૦૦માં ૧૦૦ રૂપિયા, ૧૯૦૫માં ૧૦૦ રૂપિયા, ૧૯૦૭માં ૫૦૦ રૂપિયા અને ૧૯૦૯માં ૧૦૦૦ રૂપિયા. ૧૯૧૭માં, ૧ અને ૨'૧/૨ રૂપિયાની ચલણ નોટોનું લોકાર્પણ કરવામાં આવ્યું.
ભારતીય રિઝર્વ બેંકે ૧૯૩૮માં ૨, ૫, ૧૦, ૫૦, ૧૦૦, ૧૦૦૦ અને ૧૦,૦૦૦ રૂપિયાની નોટો છાપીને નાણું છાપવાની શરૂઆત કરી, જ્યારે સરકારે ૧ રૂપિયાની નોટો છાપવાની સત્તા પોતાની પાસે રાખી.
After independence, new designs were introduced to remove the portrait of the King. The government continued to issue the 1 rupee note, while the Reserve Bank issued other denominations, including the 5000 and 10,000 rupee notes introduced in 1949. In the 1970s, 20 and 50 rupee notes were introduced but denominations higher than 100 rupees were demonetized in 1978. In 1987, the 500 rupee note was introduced, followed by the 1000 rupees in 2000.
In September 2009, Reserve Bank of India has decided to introduce polymer notes on a trial basis. Initially, 100 crore pieces of ₨. 10 denomination notes will be introduced.According to the Reserve Bank officials, the polymer notes will have an average lifespan of 5 years and be difficult to counterfeit. The polymer notes are cleaner than the regular notes, too.
The current series, which began in 1996, is called the Mahatma Gandhi series. Currency notes are printed at the Currency Note Press, Nashik, Bank Note Press, Dewas, Bharatiya Note Mudra Nigam Limited presses at Salboni and Mysore and at the Watermark Paper Manufacturing Mill, Hoshangabad.
Each banknote has its amount written in 17 languages illustrating the diversity of the country. ATMs usually give ₨. 100, ₨. 500, and ₨. 1000 notes. ₨. 1000 notes are analogous to the higher valued notes of the United States dollar and the euro.
In recent years, the banknotes were slightly modified to include see through registration on the left side of obverse. In addition, the year is now printed on the reverse. EURion constellation was added to ₨. 100. The revised ₨. 10, 20 were issued in 2006, and ₨. 50, 100, 1000 in 2005. The RS. 5 notes were stopped from being printed, but have started again since 2009.
The Zero rupee note is not an official government issue.
The language panel on Indian rupee banknotes display the denomination of the note in 15 of the 22 official languages of India.
Officially, the Indian rupee has a market determined exchange rate. However, the RBI trades actively in the USD/INR currency market to impact effective exchange rates. Thus, the currency regime in place for the Indian rupee with respect to the US dollar is a de facto controlled exchange rate. This is sometimes called a dirty or managed float. Other rates such as the EUR/INR and INR/JPY have volatilities that are typical of floating exchange rates. It should be noted, however, that unlike China, successive administrations have not followed a policy of pegging the INR to a specific foreign currency at a particular exchange rate. RBI intervention in currency markets is solely to deliver low volatility in the exchange rates, and not to take a view on the rate or direction of the Indian rupee in relation to other currencies.
Also affecting convertibility is a series of customs regulations restricting the import and export of rupees. Legally, foreign nationals are forbidden from importing or exporting rupees, while Indian nationals can import and export only up to 5000 rupees at a time, and the possession of 500 and 1000 rupee notes in Nepal is prohibited.
RBI also exercises a system of capital controls in addition to the intervention in the currency markets. On the current account, there are no currency conversion restrictions hindering buying or selling foreign exchange . On the capital account, foreign institutional investors have convertibility to bring money in and out of the country and buy securities . Local firms are able to take capital out of the country in order to expand globally. But local households are restricted in their ability to do global diversification. However, owing to an enormous expansion of the current account and the capital account, India is increasingly moving towards de facto full convertibility.
Many economist have a confusion regarding the interchange of the currency with the gold, but the system that India follows is that money cannot be exchanged for gold, in any circumstances or any situation.Money cannot be changed into gold by the RBI. This is because it will becomes difficult to handle it. India follows the same principle of Great Britain and America.
System, a dual exchange rate system, introduced a partial convertibility of the Rupee in March 1992.
ઢાંચો:Exchange Rate
ઢાંચો:Rupeeઢાંચો:Currencies of Asiaઢાંચો:Currency signs
