વિકિપીડિયાના માપદંડ મુજબ ઊચ્ચ કક્ષાનો લેખ બનાવવા માટે આ લેખમાં સુધારો કરવાની જરૂર છે. યોગ્ય સુધારો કરીને આ સંદેશો કાઢી નાંખો. ટાઇપ કરવા અંગે મદદ માટે પાનાંનુ સંપાદન કરવાની રીત તેમજ "કેવી રીતે" શ્રેણીના લેખ જુઓ. 
The SIG Pro is a series of semi-automatic pistols developed and manufactured jointly by Schweizerische Industrie Gesellschaft and J. P. Sauer & Sohn. It was the first polymer-frame handgun from either company and one of the first pistols to feature a built-in universal accessory rail and interchangeable grips. 
The SIG Pro was marketed as a lightweight and compact alternative to the "legacy" SIG-Sauer handguns in an increasingly competitive and budget-oriented law enforcement market. The pistol is the result of continued collaboration between two famous European arms makers: SIG of Neuhausen, Switzerland and Sauer & Sohn of Germany. As with other joint ventures between the two companies, these pistols are sometimes referred to as "SIG-Sauer". It was originally developed as a .40 S&W-caliber service pistol and introduced in June 1998 with the SP 2340 model, followed shortly by a version in .357 SIG . About one year later, a 9x19mm Parabellum variant, the SP 2009, was introduced and entered production in response to demand for the type.
The SIG Pro is a short recoil operated, locked breech semi-automatic pistol. It uses a traditional Browning cam-operated locking system. The barrel locks into the slide via enlarged ejection port. 
The frame is made from polymer, with detachable grip panels. Grip panels can be easily replaced and are available in several different sizes and shapes. 
The overall design is slightly different from earlier SIG-Sauer pistols such as P220 or P226, as there is no separate disassembly lever on the frame and the slide stop lever looks quite different.
The standard SIG Pro does not have a manual safety but it does incorporate a decocking lever, trigger-bar disconnect, automatic firing pin lock and a hammer safety intercept notch .
The Sig Pro comes standard as a double-action/single action pistol with 10 lb and 4.5 lb trigger pulls, respectively.
