ઢાંચો:Expand
ઢાંચો:Sustainable energyઊર્જા બચતએ ઉર્જાનો મહત્તમ ઉપિયોગ અને તેના બગાડને રોકવા ના પગલા છે. જે આજના યુગની તાતી જરુરિયાત છે.
Energy conservation refers to efforts made to reduce energy consumption in order to preserve resources for the future and reduce environmental pollution. Energy conservation can be achieved through increased efficient energy use, in conjunction with decreased energy consumption and/or reduced consumption from conventional energy sources. 
Energy conservation can result in increased financial capital, environmental quality, national security, personal security, and human comfort.  Individuals and organizations that are direct consumers of energy choose to conserve energy to reduce energy costs and promote economic security. Industrial and commercial users can increase energy use efficiency to maximize profit
Electrical energy conservation is an important element of energy policy. Energy conservation reduces the energy consumption and energy demand per capita and thus offsets some of the growth in energy supply needed to keep up with population growth. This reduces the rise in energy costs, and can reduce the need for new power plants, and energy imports. The reduced energy demand can provide more flexibility in choosing the most preferred methods of energy production.
By reducing emissions, energy conservation is an important part of lessening climate change. Energy conservation facilitates the replacement of non-renewable resources with renewable energy. Energy conservation is often the most economical solution to energy shortages, and is a more environmentally being alternative to increased energy production.
Petroleum Conservation Research Association is an Indian government body created in 1976 and engaged in promoting energy efficiency and conservation in every walk of life. In the recent past PCRA has done two mega national wide mass media campaigns in television, radion & print media which have been well received by the massess and end users of petroleum products. An impact assessment survey by a third party revealed that due to these mega campaigns by PCRA,over all awareness level have gone up leading to saving of fossil fuels worth crores of rupees besides saving dear "EARTH" from pollution. Due to these mega campaigns, many awards won by PCRA is just testimony of sincere effords by tireless PCRA for the sake of nation. For further details you may like to see website www.pcra.org
Bureau of Energy Efficiency is an Indian governmental organization created in 2002 responsible for promoting energy efficiency and conservation.
Since the 1973 oil crisis, energy conservation has been an issue in Japan. All oil based fuel is imported, so indigenous sustainable energy is being developed.
The Energy Conservation Center promotes energy efficiency in every aspect of Japan. Private entities are implementing the efficient use of energy for industries.
In Lebanon and since 2002 The Lebanese Center for Energy Conservation has been promoting the development of efficient and rational uses of energy and the use of renewable energy at the consumer level. It was created as a project financed by the Global Environment Facility and the Ministry of Energy Water under the management of the United Nations Development Programme and gradually established itself as an independent technical national center although it continues to be supported by the United Nations Development Programme as indicated in the Memorandum of Understanding signed between MEW and UNDP on Jun. -જાપાન
In New Zealand the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority is responsible for promoting energy efficiency and conservation.
At the end of 2006, the European Union-EU pledged to cut its annual consumption of primary energy by 20% by 2020. The 'European Union Energy Efficiency Action Plan' is long awaited.
As part of the EU's SAVE Programme, aimed at promoting energy efficiency and encouraging energy-saving behaviour, the Boiler Efficiency Directive specifies minimum levels of efficiency for boilers fired with liquid or gaseous fuels.
Energy conservation in the United Kingdom has been receiving increased attention over recent years. Key factors behind this are the Government's commitment to reducing carbon emissions, the projected 'energy gap' in UK electricity generation, and the increasing reliance on imports to meet national energy needs. Domestic housing and road transport are currently the two biggest problem areas.
The and Wales and 21,660,000 of these being occupied if each home used an energy monitor and saved an average of 20% of electricity there is a potential saving of 1.9 million tones of carbon.
The United States is currently the largest single consumer of energy. The U.S. Department of Energy categorizes national energy use in four broad sectors: transportation, residential, commercial, and industrial.
Energy usage in transportation and residential sectors, about half of U.S. energy consumption, is largely controlled by individual domestic consumers. Commercial and industrial energy expenditures are determined by businesses entities and other facility managers. National energy policy has a significant effect on energy usage across all four sectors, and its strengthening is part of the 2010 Presidential-Congressional legislative debate.
Advocates and critics of various forms and policies of energy conservation debate some issues, such as:
ઢાંચો:Top
ઢાંચો:Middle
ઢાંચો:Bottom
ઢાંચો:Environmental technologyઢાંચો:Sustainability
