એપ્રિલ ફૂલ્સ ડે અથવા ઓલ ફૂલ્સ ડે તરિકે જાણીતો આ દિવસ, રજાનો દિવસ કે કોઈ પ્રખ્યાત તહેવાર ના હોવા છતાં ભારત સહિત ઘણા દેશોમાં પહેલી એપ્રિલનાં દિવસે બહોળા પ્રમાણમાં અલાયદી રીતે ઉજવવામાં આવે છે. આજના દિવસે લોકો પોતાના મિત્રો, કુટુંબીજનો, પડોશીઓ અને ક્યારેક દુશ્મનો સાથે રમૂજભરી ટિખળ કરે છે. સામાન્ય રીતે આ ટિખળમાં સામી વ્યક્તિને મૂર્ખ બનાવવાનો કે છોભી પાડવાનો મુખ્ય ઉદ્દેશ્ય હોય છે. પારંપરિક રીતે કેટલાક દેશોમાં આવી મજાક-મસ્તીનો દોર ફક્ત બપોર સુધી જ ચાલે છે: જેમકે, યુ.કે., ઓસ્ટ્રેલિયા, ન્યૂઝીલેન્ડ અને કેનેડા, જો કોઇ બપોર પછી આવી રમૂજ કરે તો તેનેજ "એપ્રિલ ફૂલ" કહેવામાં આવે છે. પરંતુ બીજા દેશોમાં અને આપણા ભારતમાં પણ, આવી મજાક આખો દિવસ ચાલે છે. 
એપ્રિલ્ફુલ્સ ડેનું ઉદ્ગ્મ ઘણું વિચિત્ર છે. એક વાયકા પ્ર્માણે ગ્રેગેરિયન કેલેન્ડરને અપનાવાયા પછી તુરંત માં આ દિવસ મનાવવાની શરુઆત થઈ.આ શબ્દનો ઉલ્લેખ અમુક કોઐક વ્યક્તિઓ જે હજી પણ જ્યુલિયન કેલેન્ડર વાપરતા હતાં તેમના સંદર્ભમાં થયો હોય. In many pre-Christian cultures May Day was celebrated as the first day of summer, and signalled the start of the spring planting season. An April Fool was someone who did this prematurely. Another origin is that April 1 was counted the first day of the year in France. When King Charles IX changed that to January 1, some people stayed with April 1. Those who did were called "April Fools" and were taunted by their neighbors.In the eighteenth century the festival was often posited as going back to the times of Noah. An English newspaper article published on April 13th, 1789 said that the day had its origins when he sent the raven off too early, before the waters had receded. He did this on the first day of the Hebrew month that corresponds with April. A possible reference to April Fools' Day can be seen in the Canterbury Tales in the Nun's Priest's tale, a tale of two fools: Chanticleer and the fox, which took place on March 32nd.


એપ્રિલ ફૂલના દિવસે થતી મજાકોને કારણે ઘણી વાર સાચા સમાચારો અને વાતો પર લોકો તુરંત ભરોસો નથી કરી શકતા.
Iranians play jokes on each other on the 13th day of the Persian new year, which falls on April 1 or April 2. This day, celebrated as far back as 536 BC, is called Sizdah Bedar and is the oldest prank-tradition in the world still alive today; this fact has led many to believe that April Fools' Day has its origins in this tradition.
The April 1 tradition in France and French-speaking Canada includes poisson d'avril, attempting to attach a paper fish to the victim's back without being noticed. This is also widespread in other nations, such as Italy is also used to refer to any jokes done during the day). In Spanish-speaking countries, similar pranks are practiced on December 28, día de los Santos Inocentes, the "Day of the Holy Innocents". This custom also exists in certain areas of Belgium, including the province of Antwerp. The Flemish tradition is for children to lock out their parents or teachers, only letting them in if they promise to bring treats the same evening or the next day.
In Poland, prima aprilis is a day full of jokes; various hoaxes are prepared by people, media and even public institutions. Serious activities are usually avoided. This conviction is so strong that the anti-Turkish alliance with Leopold I signed on April 1, 1683, was backdated to March 31.
In Scotland, April Fools' Day is traditionally called Hunt-the-Gowk Day, although this name has fallen into disuse. The traditional prank is to ask someone to deliver a sealed message requesting help of some sort. In fact, the message reads "Dinna laugh, dinna smile. Hunt the gowk another mile". The recipient, upon reading it, will explain he can only help if he first contacts another person, and sends the victim to this person with an identical message, with the same result. Also Scotland has 2 whole days for pranks, April 1 and April 2.
In Denmark the 1st of May is known as "Maj-kat", meaning "May-cat", and is identical to April Fools' Day, though Danes also celebrate April Fools' Day .
Some Jewish communities have a traditional event called a Purim spiel, which is similar in many ways to April Fools' Day. Fake newspaper articles are common.
